
# IMPORTANT NOTICE

<span style="color: red">This repository contains code that is a work in progress.  The current
set of simulations are designed for METIS pipeline development, at
this point including correct FITS headers and file format.  The
resultant files **DO NOT** contain instrumentally or scientifically
accurate data, and under no circumstances should be used to evaluate
potential performance of the METIS instrument.</span>



# METIS Simulations

This respository contains scripts which can be used as a wrapper for ScopeSim to generate a set of simulated METIS data for pipeline development. 

 - [Installing the Code](#installing-the-code)
 - [Simulated Data Summary](#simulated-data-summary)
 - [List of Output Fits Files](#output-fits-files)
 - [Running the Code](#running-the-code)
 - [Custom Simulations](#custom-simulations)


# Installing the Code

In a clean conda environment the following sequence of commands will
download and install the software with the correct dependencies. 


```
> git clone git@github.com:AstarVienna/METIS_Simulations.git

> cd METIS_Simulations/ESO
> poetry install
> poetry shell
```


# Running the Code

Before the first time you run the code, execute the script

```
> ./downloadPackages.py
```

Which will download the instrument, telescope and site specific data packages. 

To run the default set of FITS files, as described in [Data Product Summary](#data-product-summary), 


```
> ./run_recipes.py --doCalib=5
> md5sum -c checksums.dat | grep -v OK
```

This will run the script, automatically determining the necessary flats and darks and running them at the end of the sequence; the number indicates
how many of each type to generate. 

## Command Line Options

There are several command line options

```
> ./run_recipes.py
```

Runs the script using recipes.yaml as the input yaml file, write the output to output/, and takes the date of observation from the YAML template. If no date is given, it will increment from the previous date; a date is required for the first template in the YAML file. 


```
> ./run_recipes.py --doCalib 1
```

Automatically determines which darks, flats, and WCU darks are needed and executes them at the end of the sequence. Any darks/flats in the YAML file will also be run; this may result in duplicate FITS file contents. 

```
> ./run_recipes.py --inputYAML myFile.yaml
```

runs the script using myFile.yaml instead of recipes.yaml as the input

```
> ./run_recipes.py --outputDir myDirectory
```

writes the output to myDirectory.

```
> ./run_recipes.py --sequence "yyyy-mm-dd hh:mm:ss" 
```

runs the set of simulations starting the sequence at the given date and automatically incrementing the time stamp through the sequence.

```
> ./run_recipes.py --sequence 1
```

does the same but takes the dateobs from the first item in the sequence.

```
> ./run_recipes.py --testRun
```

Runs the script without executing the simulations to check input values.

```
> ./run_recipes.py --small
```

runs the script with 32x32 pixel outputs, for testing purposes. 


```
> ./generateSummary.py  --inDir myDir --outFile summary.csv
```

will generate a summary CSV table of the contents of the given directory. Default is output/ and summary.csv


# Simulated Data Summary

This release contains FITS files for all the RAW input files listed in the "Input Data" entries for the 
recipe descriptions in Chapter 6 of the DRLD.  Each file has the correct dimensions, plus compliant keywords 
as required for developing the EDPS skeleton, specifically the matched keywords and derived aliases, as well 
as the standard FITS keywords provided by ScopeSim. 

## Included Keywords

 - DET.DIT
 - DET.NDIT
 - DPR.CATG
 - DPR.TECH
 - DPR.TYPE
 - INS.MODE
 - INS.OPTI*.NAME (depends on instrument)
 - SEQ.WCU.LASERn

 - DRS.FILTER
 - DRS.SLIT
 - DRS.IFU
 - DRS.MASK
 - DRS.PUPIL

## FITS file contents

All of the FITS files were generated by ScopeSim using the provided
script. In most cases, they contain data which is a first
approximation of real data; further work is needed in many cases to
set DIT/NDIT/Filters for reasonable flux levels, and to refine the
choice of science targets and standard stars for more accurate (and
science-case appropriate) choices. We have generated data and
calibrations for one set of filters for each mode as a base set; this
can easily be extended to multiple sets as needed. For images where
the data will be averaged, two files have been generated with
different time of observation and the same settings. 

The coronagraph, pupil imaging and chopper home images currently
contain placeholder data as these are not modes sximulated by
ScopeSim; by the next release these will be updated to include input
simulated images.

This release does not include external calibration files (such as source catalogues).
FITS keywords needed by the recipes themselves (but not by the EDPS skeleton) may not
be complete. 


# Output FITS Files

A summary spreadsheet of the files can be found [here].(https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1aYQh6Nd17dvrPYVx3D96VwUFsnswIY7DlfNHgKLCVys/edit#gid=0)

The set of simulations is as follows

## Science + Calibrations

- LM/N Science Source: a star field 
- LSS/IFU Science Source: extended galaxy

  - sky fields for each science exposure
  - standard star (centred point source) for each filter/instrument combination
  - sky fields for each standard star

- Coronagraphic RAW Files for

   - RAVC,LM, APP,LM, RAVC,IFU
       - sky fields for each mode
       - off axis PSF

- Flat field / RSRF as appropriate for each  instrument / filter combination.
- RSRF images are generated for two lamp temperatures. 

- Dark Frames for each exposure time / instrument combination
   
## Technical and Calibrations

- Set of images for detector linearity and gain calculationes
- Distortion images with the pinhole mask
- RSRF images with the pinhole mask for order tracing
- set of images for slitloss determination
- set of laser spectrum images for wavelength calibration
- chopperhome images
- pupil images
- dark frames to match the exposure times for the above

The list of  RAW files was compiled from the DRLD recipe listings
in Chapter 6, specifically the "Input Data" entry. FITS keywords and file types were
cross-checked against

    - INS.mode values of Table 2 of the DRLD.
    - List of needed calibrations / mode from Table 4
    - Alias keywords (needed for the EDPS skeleton)  given in Table 5
    - Matched keywords (needed for the EDPS skeleton)  given in Table 6.
    - The DPR.CATG, TECH, TYPE etc. given in Table 20.


# Generating Custom Simulations

If you want to run the scripts for your own models, there are two files you will need to edit, in addition to the
command line options given above.


## YAML file

This file consists of a sequence of templates in the form

```
LM_IMAGE_SCI_RAW1:
  do.catg: LM_IMAGE_SCI_RAW
  mode: "img_lm"
  source: 
    name: star_field
    kwargs: {}
  properties:
    dit: 0.25
    ndit: 4
    filter_name: "Lp"
    catg: "SCIENCE"
    tech: "IMAGE,LM"
    type: "OBJECT"
    nObs: 5
```

The first line is a unique label for the template.

mode: one of

|mode  |description    |
|------|---------------|
|img_lm|imaging LM band|
|img_n |imaging N band |
|lss_l |LSS L band     |
|lss_m |LSS M band     |
|lss_n |LSS N band     |
|lms   |IFU            |


source:  details on the source to be used. Sources are given in sources.py
  A source consists of a name, as in sources.py, and a (possibly empty)
  list of kwargs (key word arguments). See file sources.py for details.

current sources

|source           |description                    |
|-----------------|-------------------------------|
|empty_sky        |blank sky                      |
|flat_field       |lamp flat                      |
|star_field       |fixed set of stellar sources   |
|simple_star12    |12th mag point source at centre|
|simple_star18    |18th mag point source at centre|
|simple_gal       |elliptical galaxy              |
|pinhole_mask     |pinhole mask on WCU            |
|laser_spectrum_lm|laser spectrum (LM) on WCU     |
|laser_spectrum_lm|laser spectrum (N) on WCU      |

properties:

dit:  DIT value (float)

ndit: NDIT value (integer)

filter_name: one of

|filter_name  |band|
|-------------|----|
|open         |any |
|closed       |any |
|Lp           |LM  |
|short-L      |LM  |
|L_spec       |LM  |
|Mp           |LM  |
|M_spec       |LM  |
|Br_alpha     |LM  |
|Br_alpha_ref |LM  |
|PAH_3.3      |LM  |
|PAH_3.3_ref  |LM  |
|CO_1-0_ice   |LM  |
|CO_ref       |LM  |
|H2O-ice      |LM  |
|IB_4.05      |LM  |
|HCI_L_short  |LM  |
|HCI_L_long   |LM  |
|HCI_M        |LM  |
|N1           |N   |
|N2           |N   |
|N3           |N   |
|N_spec       |N   |
|PAH_8.6      |N   |
|PAH_8.6_ref  |N   |
|PAH_11.25    |N   |
|PAH_11.25_ref|N   |
|Ne_II        |N   |
|Ne_II_ref    |N   |
|S_IV         |N   |
|S_IV_ref     |N   |

ndfilter_name: optional, one of

|ndfilter_name|
|-------------|
|open         |
|ND_OD1       |
|ND_OD2       |
|ND_OD3       |
|ND_OD4       |
|ND_OD5       |

catg: one of

|catg     |
|---------|
|CALIB    |
|SCIENCE  |
|TECHNICAL|
|---------|

tech:  one of

|tech    |description              |
|--------|-------------------------|
|IMAGE,LM|imaging                  |
|IMAGE,N |imaging                  |
|LMS     |ifu                      |
|LSS,LM  |longslit spectroscopy    |
|LSS,N   |longslit spectroscopy    |
|PUP,M   |pupil imaging            |
|PUP,N   |pupil imaging            |
|APP,LM  |APP coronagraph, imaging |
|RAVC,IFU|RAVC coronagraph, IFU    |
|RAVC,LM |RAVC coronagraph, imaging|
(py37) tantalus>


 type: one of

|TYPE         |description                   |
|-------------|------------------------------|
|DARK         |   dark frame                 |
|CHOPHOME     |chopper home                  |
|DARK,WCUOFF  |dark (WCU)                    |
|FLAT,TWILIGHT|   skyflat                    |
|FLAT,LAMP    |lamp flat                     |
|DETLIN       |linearity determination       |
|OBJECT       |science object                |
|SKY          |sky frame                     |
|STD          |standard source               |
|DISTORTION   |distortion (WCU, pinhole mask)|
|WAVE         |wavelength calibration        |
|PSF,OFFAXIS  |off axis PSF (coronagraph)    |
|PUPIL        |pupil imaging                 |


 nObs: number of each observation to execute

 dateobs: date in the form  yyyy-mm-dd hh:mm:ss.s

